# BIOMD0000000423: Nyman2012_InsulinSignalling

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000423.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/BIOMD0000000423.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This model is from the article:  
**Mechanistic explanations for counter-intuitive phosphorylation dynamics of the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrate-1 in response to insulin in murine adipocytes.**   
Nyman E, Fagerholm S, Jullesson D, Str√•lfors P, Cedersund G. _FEBS J._ 2012
Jan 16. [22248283](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22248283) ,  
**Abstract:**   
Insulin signaling through insulin receptor (IR) and insulin receptor
substrate-1 (IRS1) is important for insulin control of target cells. We have
previously demonstrated a rapid and simultaneous overshoot behavior in the
phosphorylation dynamics of IR and IRS1 in human adipocytes. Herein, we
demonstrate that in murine adipocytes a similar overshoot behavior is not
simultaneous for IR and IRS1. The peak of IRS1 phosphorylation, which is a
direct consequence of the phosphorylation and the activation of IR, occurs
earlier than the peak of IR phosphorylation. We used a conclusive modeling
framework to unravel the mechanisms behind this counter-intuitive order of
phosphorylation. Through a number of rejections, we demonstrate that two
fundamentally different mechanisms may create the reversed order of peaks: (i)
two pools of phosphorylated IR, where a large pool of internalized IR peaks
late, but phosphorylation of IRS1 is governed by a small plasma membrane-
localized pool of IR with an early peak, or (ii) inhibition of the IR-
catalyzed phosphorylation of IRS1 by negative feedback. Although (i) may
explain the reversed order, this two-pool hypothesis alone requires extensive
internalization of IR, which is not supported by experimental data. However,
with the additional assumption of limiting concentrations of IRS1, (i) can
explain all data. Also, (ii) can explain all available data. Our findings
illustrate how modeling can potentiate reasoning, to help draw nontrivial
conclusions regarding competing mechanisms in signaling networks. Our work
also reveals new differences between human and murine insulin signaling.
Database The mathematical model described here has been submitted to the
Online Cellular Systems Modelling Database and can be accessed at
http://jjj.biochem.sun.ac.za/database/nyman/index.html free of charge.


